You know I’ve had an illness,
but I’m getting along all right.
There’s a little tumor here in the brain,
which the doctors are treating.
And whatever comes, one way or the other,
well, it has been wonderful
to work with you all these years,
and I enjoyed it tremendously.
And I’m very grateful to Jehovah
I could come to this meeting
and be with you.
Like C. T. Russell before him,
Brother Knorr had an exceptional gift
for organizing the Kingdom work.
That set the stage for the amazing growth
that the organization experienced
during the closing decades
of the 20th century.
Nathan Knorr died on June 8, 1977.
Note what Brother Albert Schroeder,
a fellow member of the Governing Body,
wrote about him:
“As the Society’s principal administrator,
“there have come to be over 90 branches.
“Brother Knorr has proved to be
“the right theocratic entrepreneur
for this period of Jehovah’s Kingdom work.”
Brother Knorr helped to clarify the role
of the Governing Body and its committees.
Headquarters representatives
were sent out to various branches,
branches were better organized,
bodies of elders were appointed
in various congregations,
training programs were instituted,
and schools were established.
Because of the organizational growth,
the number of conventions
being held worldwide
now numbered into the hundreds,
and the Governing Body members
wanted to be present
at as many of those conventions as possible.
For example,
at the 1969 “Peace on Earth”
International Convention,
a Governing Body member
would fly to the convention city
for the opening day,
catch a flight to another convention city,
and then return to the original city
so that he could speak on the closing day.
In the 1970’s and 1980’s,
many existing branches
with printing and shipping capabilities
needed to expand to ensure
that the worldwide supply of spiritual food
would flow uninterrupted
no matter what happened on the world scene.
At times,
there were more than 20 branch construction
or expansion projects
going on simultaneously.
And the Governing Body
was very interested in each one
and eager to dedicate
the new facilities once completed.
For me, it was always very encouraging
to have contact
with the brothers of the Governing Body,
to see their great zeal
and their loving interests
in the brothers behind the Iron Curtain.
In 1977,
something outstanding happened.
it was possible
for Brothers Jaracz, Franz, and Sydlik
to visit the brothers in Poland.
So that was the first time
—the first time—
that members of the Governing Body
could visit the country
behind the Iron Curtain.
They spoke to many overseers,
pioneers, and longtime Witnesses.
That was, of course, a wonderful experience.
One year after this visit,
Brother Jaracz along with Brother Henschel
were able to get an appointment
with government officials
to promote a more tolerant attitude
of Jehovah’s organization
and the work
that Jehovah’s Witnesses were doing
in Eastern Europe and especially in Poland.
Now, mind you, this was all taking place
some ten years prior
to the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe.
They took various steps
to meet with the local brothers in person.
And Brother Barry of the Governing Body
had the opportunity to hold a secret meeting
in the city of Leningrad with Brother Kose,
who was responsible
for the activity in the territory.
Brother Kose said that he received
tremendous encouragement
from that discussion,
from the conversation with Brother Barry.
And it was interesting
that it wasn’t until after that meeting
that Brother Kose found out
that he had been talking
to a member of the Governing Body.
The brothers in Eastern Europe
really needed help to resist
decades of satanic efforts
to destroy their faith in Jehovah
and weaken the unity
and confidence in His organization.
The members of the Governing Body
showed very deep appreciation
for the brothers
who kept the communication
with the brothers behind the Iron Curtain.
Because you have to imagine
that to get the spiritual food there,
they had to be willing
to take a personal risk
to visit
and to bring the spiritual food
to the brothers there,
not just to the countries right close
but down there to the brothers
—down there to Siberia.
In the second half of the 1980’s,
the Iron Curtain began to open up.
There was a sense of freedom in the air.
The brothers in Eastern Europe
could feel that freedom.
As governments granted permission,
the Governing Body organized
conventions in Eastern-bloc countries
—for example, in Poland and Czechoslovakia.
And when bans were lifted,
the members of the Governing Body
traveled many times
to all the countries that were possible
—Poland, Hungary, Romania,
Czechoslovakia, Russia, Ukraine,
and to the Baltic States,
and also to Belarus.
In November 1989,
the Berlin Wall came down.
Well, this was a great turning point
in the history of the 20th century.
But it also meant greater freedom
for our brothers.
The Governing Body really sprung into action.
They wanted to go
and accelerate the work there.
So Brother Jaracz as well as other members
of the Governing Body
closely supervised the work.
Therefore, the number of visits they made,
well, just skyrocketed.
In the fall of 1989,
Brothers Milton Henschel and Theodore Jaracz
had the unique opportunity of visiting
the brothers in the Soviet Union
for the first time.
The brothers really wanted
to study the situation on the ground.
They met with all of the elders,
circuit overseers,
district overseers,
and members of the Country Committee.
It was like one big shepherding visit.
So in Eastern Europe,
1991 was the stage
for three international conventions
with the subject
“Lovers of Godly Freedom.”
But, of course,
besides these international conventions,
other open conventions
(so not in secret, no, open conventions)
were held for the first time
in the former Soviet Union
—in Estonia, in Russia, and in the Ukraine.
Just imagine!
After decades of such difficult persecution,
we experienced the opportunity to be together
with our worldwide brotherhood
and to see the brothers
from the Governing Body.
It was an unforgettable time.
It was the happiest of times.
It was super!
One outstanding convention
was held in Zagreb.
Yes, it was a loving
and a courageous decision
of the Governing Body to go there
despite the uncertainty
of the political situation in the country
and maybe (coming up) a civil war.
This convention was the only public event
that was allowed by the government
in the city of Zagreb.
All other public events
were canceled,
but the convention
of Jehovah’s Witnesses was not.
Policemen and soldiers
assigned to keep security
and order in the stadium
were astonished that Serbians, Croats,
Slovenians, Montenegrins, and Bosnians
were sitting together in peace and in unity.
At those international conventions
in Eastern Europe,
members of the Governing Body
gave the final motivating talk.
And those talks,
given less than five months
after the thrill
of obtaining legal recognition
for our work in the Soviet Union,
strengthened and encouraged our brothers
for trials they would face in the future.
It’s plain to see
that the Governing Body of years past
expended themselves
to “know well the appearance of [the] flock.”
They poured themselves out
“like a drink offering”
in order to “take good care of [the] sheep.”
The same deep love
and tender concern for you,
the sheep of the Great Shepherd’s flock,
has been evident throughout modern times
right down to this day.